welcome to topcast and ostensibly this
is
part two
of my discussion of chapter seven of the
fabric of reality a conversation about
justification but i'm not actually going
to get to any readings from that chapter
today this is just an indulgence for me
it's going to be
readings from
karl popper's book realism in the aim of
science which was a postscript to the
logic of scientific discovery and the
reason i'm going through that before i
get to which should be released soon
after this the
actual discussion of chapter seven part
two of chapter seven a conversation
about justification from the fabric of
reality the reason i'm doing this
is just because there is a lot of
content in that chapter there that
echoes what papa says in this book
realism in the aim of science because
there is a section there section 4 of
part one called corroboration so i
thought it might just be illuminating
and fun to
go through some of the places where
i agree with what poplar is saying and
then where i disagree with what popper
is saying and then we can see how david
deutsch has improved on papa and has
explained what papa was trying to get at
in books like this one this is a
464 page term all about realism in the
aim of science because david deutsch has
removed entirely from epistemology i
would suggest this whole concern about
how
probable or likely to be true our
theories and explanations are now papa
was existing at a time where people
really strongly believed in this problem
of induction how we could justify as
true or probably true particular
theories and reducing science to a large
extent to a process of trying to predict
the future rather than explain reality
the emphasis of papa's contemporaries
and competitors even through to today
is to
not really understand what explanation
is and the role of explanation let alone
the role of prediction let alone the
role of science they get it all muddled
up and so papa was trying to
escape from the prevailing world view
that he existed within to give us
something new
it must have been hard and i think that
this chapter which is why i want to read
just through sections of it sections of
his whole section here called
corroboration you can see him struggling
to try and escape from false
epistemology these unhelpful ways of
thinking about the project of science
and so what i'm going to do here is just
to read through sections of this and
then we'll come back in the next episode
to see how david deutsch has actually
improved on things this chapter being
titled a conversation about
justification
seems to be
to do with words a conversation is a
dialogue that involves words and the
word
justification is a term that is used in
philosophy
it's a term that i've tried to remove
insofar as possible from any discussion
about epistemology and we're going to
see that i think we can do away with it
i explained this in part one as well and
david deutsch himself said as much in
the recording he made for the
introduction to
the audiobook version of the fabric of
reality let's just consider a basic
question before i get into discussing
the chapter property and the question is
what are we doing here i don't just mean
right now here in this podcast i mean
in life
in creating knowledge and in science
that is the subject of this episode and
this chapter of the book after all
what's really going on with science what
are we doing when we are doing science
well the thing is we are trying to
understand something about the world but
why are we doing that it always comes
back to one central issue first stated
and emphasized by papa and underlined
and promoted by deutsch and that issue
is
we have a problem
houston we have a problem it is we have
a problem it's always we have a problem
we always have a problem and we want to
find a solution to
that problem we want to solve a problem
so we can move on to
something better
this in fact is life and a small sliver
of life is science for most of us anyway
for some of us it's considerably most of
life but in science we have problems
lots of problems
as papa rightly said of science itself
quote i think that there is only one way
to science or to philosophy for that
matter
to meet a problem to see its beauty and
fall in love with it to get married to
it and to live with it happily till
death do ye part unless you should meet
another an even more fascinating problem
or unless indeed you should obtain a
solution
but even if you do obtain a solution you
may then discover to your delight the
existence of a whole family of
enchanting though perhaps difficult
problem children for whose welfare you
may work with a purpose to the end of
your days end quote
now that quote there is from a book
called
realism and the aim of science published
in 1996 after poppa's death but it also
served as a postscript to his
first book the logic of scientific
discovery a postscript that was
published sometime well after the
publication of the first edition of the
logic of scientific discovery
notice something
missing there when it comes to papa
saying what
science is about or what philosophy is
about
conspicuous perhaps by its absence
any mention of the word
truth
science we do not do to find the final
and that's why we often don't emphasize
it
we are not even finding
truth of a kind we can be confident in
or certain about or anything like that
but why am i focused on this the reason
is and the only reason for a chapter
like this particular one in the fabric
of reality that i am discussing is that
this view of science insofar as it is
known i think it's poorly understood and
insofar as it is understood it seems not
to be taken very seriously
as for it being taught in some sort of
formal way so that people can speak
sensibly about the project of science
and life more broadly forget it we are
mired in superstitious thinking to a
large extent all of our knowledge has
antecedents you know the things that
came before our first attempts first
approximations
here's a story millennia ago after the
dawn of language people struggling on
the plains or in the jungles and
struggling to eek out in existence and
keep the children in the tribe safe
needed heuristics rules of thumb
so they invented gods and the gods knew
the truth the gods had power and they
had possession of the final truth they
knew
what would happen and why probably their
whims but the humans did not
yet we aspired to the power of the gods
because the gods had authority
over the seasons over the weather over
natural events over everything we wanted
that so the chiefs of our ancestor
tribes and our medicine men and women
those with tribal authority needed a way
to persuade others to do what they were
told sometimes for good reasons they
knew stuff
they often didn't know why that stuff
happened but they knew that it did
happen
out of this circumstance comes
something like the more modern religions
that we have the idea that it is known
without doubt and there is no point
questioning
some revealed truth or other only the
medicine man or the chief had direct
access to the gods and later on only the
priests or other learned people could
read and interpret the wholly inerrant
book perhaps
the focus then there was on the final
ultimate revealed truth and that if
people only followed the final ultimate
revealed truth then everything would be
fine then the disaster or the flood
could be averted after all the stories
tell when you depart from the truth it's
then the disaster comes the literal
flood okay so this is one very
superficial simplistic story of the past
and of how we arrive at our folk
epistemology today
but what people are up to then
well there is much that we have
inherited in our language and our way of
understanding knowledge from then
through to the today even in the most
modern incantations of epistemology
popular in an epistemological side of
course most especially our folk
philosophy and focus epistemology which
i would include most academic versions
of these it is still taught that what
we're aiming for is to
find out the truth of the matter
science on this account therefore is a
project of finding the once and for all
solution theory or explanation that we
can carve into stone and settle the
matter have a final completed science of
something or other it's a very religious
idea
it is the hoped-for state of security
and safety and certainty and along the
road to certainty although we might not
be able to quite get there yet we're
almost there and we can be very very
confident in what we have found
confident that it is almost true and
with just a little more tinkering we'll
fill in the gaps and we'll have the
final answer
science will come to an end i mean here
on topcast by now if you've been
listening for a while that all sounds
ridiculous but it still is the
prevailing view
there still is an idea that
science is almost wrapped up we've
almost found the unification of general
relativity and quantum theory and then
we'll be done in physics and will
biology ah we're tinkering around the
edges with evolution by natural
selection we've already found the unit
of selection the gene what more is there
to understand
soon we'll cure all diseases aging will
be over
we'll have artificial general
intelligence and then
understanding will come to an end and
perhaps we'll all be unemployed because
there'll be no creative work left to do
now this is completely the opposite to
what the vision of knowledge that popper
and david deutsche especially has gifted
to us
but it's important to keep in mind that
this is not the prevailing view this is
and sometimes i myself forget it and
then i go head-long into encountering
someone or some book or some group of
people who reminds me that i'm in the
tiny minority of people who think
something a little bit different there
is an open ended series of problems
before us and each time we solve a
problem we open up a whole new family of
delightful
problem children if you like i prefer
daughter problems
than problem children whatever the case
that quote i read earlier from realism
in the aim of science that book realism
in the aim of science contains a whole
bunch of really interesting chapters but
you can tell in reading it by karl
popper of course that he is writing for
his contemporaries it's filled with
language about
certainty and probability and so i want
to read a little bit of it today
just to place perhaps in historical
context where the fabric of reality is
coming from what its intellectual
ancestor is so to speak realism in the
aim of science is a
460 something page tome
split into two major parts chapter four
of the first part is called
corroboration
now corroboration is also a term i have
a little bit of difficulty with again i
don't think it's useful but it is
language that is used by other
philosophers of science papa was not
perfect and as we'll come to papa may
not have understood popularian
epistemology
as well as people today do
now if that sounds bizarre to you we'll
come back to it because david addresses
precisely that point in the fabric of
reality papa for example focuses very
heavily on the role of probability
within philosophy within epistemology he
was trying to understand the importance
or the significance of probability he
was wrong about it that's so what
everyone's fallible i am no doubt wrong
about a lot that i say here on topcast
and looking back 200 years from now
people will be saying look how primitive
brett hall's view of epistemology was
but as i mentioned in the last episode i
did on chapter seven on a conversation
about justification from the fabric of
reality i said that this word
justified or justification
may have been superfluous to our needs
another word that crops up throughout
the chapter is this idea of
corroboration
what is corroboration well in chapter
four of the aim of science which is from
pages 217 all the way through to pages
254 papa hashes out from all angles the
rather obscure debate at the time about
the differences between
confirmation and corroboration and the
role of probability and either of these
things my personal thought is
just to steal my thunder for the end is
it's simply confusing the aim of science
as being about primarily prediction
rather than explanation if you focus on
explanations then as i emphasize over
and again
you are exceedingly lucky in this world
if you have an explanation for a
particular phenomena
and if you do have an explanation you
have an explanation there are no
alternatives and if someone comes along
with an alternative then you do a
crucial test especially in science a
crucial test is an experiment which has
an outcome that goes in a particular
direction it has a particular result and
the result will rule out
one of those theories you're extremely
lucky to have two theories it just
rarely happens in the history of science
and this is why i come back to trope
examples like the competition between
newtonian gravity and einstein's general
relativity this is one of the rare
instances where there happened to be
two competing theories where we needed
to do an experiment to figure out which
one could actually explain the results
of the experiment and which one couldn't
but for any scientific mystery
it's a mystery by definition because we
do not have an explanation of why it is
the way it is now it's very hard for me
to keep up with all areas of science so
you know my focus is on astronomy and
there are a whole bunch of open-ended
questions right now two of the most
prominent open-ended questions are what
is dark matter dark matter is the name
of a problem it began as why is it that
spiral galaxies are rotating so fast
they rotate as fast as they do because
of how massive they are this phenomena
that
orbiting bodies tend to rotate as fast
as the mass inside of the orbiting body
in other words the earth goes around the
sun as fast as it does because of the
mass of the sun
applies to everything throughout the
universe it's just a consequence well
not only of general relativity which is
the explanation of gravity but even to
the predecessor to general relativity
which is newtonian gravity both of them
predicted the same thing
the more massive the central body being
orbited the faster the things go that
are orbiting it but here's the thing in
modern day cosmology when you look at
galaxies and various other structures by
the way but let's just concentrate on
the spiral galaxies they'd rotate too
fast you add up all of the stars and
luminous matter and you can see all the
luminous matter at every single
wavelength that's putting out light
light of all different wavelengths you
find that these spiral galaxies are
rotating too fast where's the mass we
can't see the matter that's accounting
for the gravity that's causing these
things to spin so fast we don't know
what the answer is it could be that
there's actually missing matter there
that seems to be the prevailing
hypothesis but it's not really an
explanatory theory because
what is this matter another theory is
well we need to have a new theory of
gravity but no one's got a good
theory of gravity so far people have
suggested things but these theories
ad hoc modifications to existing
explanations and i won't go down the
road but epistemology would say what is
the mechanism what precisely is it is
the curvature of space-time and why is
that changing why can't we detect it in
laboratories here on earth and so on and
so forth we need a solution to this and
we don't have one and the other thing of
course is dark energy no one has any
clue what this is why is it that not
only is the universe expanding but the
rate of the expansion is accelerating
when everything else we know says it
should be slowing down perhaps even
reversing but that's not happening
what's driving this accelerating
expansion this is science this is
problem solving this is where
we don't even have an explanation forget
about having competing explanations
forget about needing to weight our
different explanations of the
probabilities of our different
explanations and being able to
corroborate run or confirm one without
being able to confirm the others no none
of that
we don't even have one when we do have a
solution to the problem which is to say
a theory explaining what's going on
precisely in terms of things that exist
in the universe that perhaps we've never
thought of before some new physical
thing that we have to postulate that
then we'll know actually exists once we
have that thing that will be the
explanation never mind trying to observe
it repeatedly over and over again it'll
be the solution that's what solves dark
matter and dark energy so anyway that's
what i say science is about i think
that's consistent with what david
deutsch says and i think it's consistent
primarily with what karl popper says as
well but as i say
people exist in a historical context and
papa was debating people who believe
something quite different about how
science works they believed in the
primacy of observations that
observations were absolutely the be all
and end all of everything in science and
therefore predicting that a certain
sequence of observations would continue
off into the future or the observations
were the thing that
showed your theory was true or probably
true in some way this is what he was
trying to debate against trying to for
the first time mind you for the first
time
try and stand up against the entire
philosophical community of his
intellectual peers
one has to be brave to do this kind of
thing and it certainly didn't make him
popular
never mind his jewish heritage he
struggled to find positions at
universities for a while there and to
our great historical shame here in
australia even we rejected him for an
academic post he went to new zealand
instead and did a lot of good work there
so i say that because he was telling the
rest of the philosophical community
and even scientists
he was saying to them all in very very
polite terms
you're all fundamentally wrong about how
science works
but the way he couched it was in very
technical philosophical jargon jargon
that was the language of the time and
the language of the discipline he had to
try and speak their language so i want
to go back to realism in the aim of
science this so-called postscript to the
logic of scientific discovery published
a long time after the logic of
scientific discovery and then
republished and the version i have was
published in as i say 1996 but written
by popper according to my edition first
published in 1983. now to some extent of
course these are esoteric considerations
it's
inside baseball to a certain extent if
you're interested in epistemology then
yeah absolutely it's useful to know
papa's broad vision about how knowledge
is generated and what the purpose of
science is but if you're really
interested in epistemology then
sometimes it can be even more
illuminating to figure out exactly what
going all the way back to this to
poppa's words about corroboration may
seem even a little esoteric for me but
there's so much here
that
speaks across the decades through to
today and you can see it's still cutting
edge stuff that people just don't get
people don't understand people don't
appreciate and the wider academic
community could do worse than taking on
some of poppa's old works and trying to
understand what the great man was saying
about
how science actually works so i'm going
to pick out just a few excerpts from
realism in the aim of science before we
get to a conversation on justification
and i'm going to begin with page 222
where papa wrote quote the inductivist
philosophy not only attributes authority
to science it also perhaps quite
unwittingly attributes to science a
cautious and indeed
timid approach which is entirely foreign
to our real procedure this philosophy in
regarding it as the aim of science to
attain high probabilities for its
theories
implies that science proceeds according
to the rule go as little as possible
beyond your evidence e
end quote and skipping a little and i'll
pick it up where papa says
quote all this presents a most
uninspiring picture of science a picture
moreover
that does not in the least resemble the
original indeed
what makes the original so inspiring is
its boldness its boldly conceived
hypotheses boldly submitted to every
kind of criticism to every reputation we
can think of including the most severe
test which our imagination may help us
to design it is this boldness which
helps us to transcend the limits narrow
at first of our imagination and of
ordinary language
end quote so that first part there where
this idea from induction kind of says
don't go too far beyond the evidence it
misses the point
it misses the point
consider the great grand theories of
cosmology the big bang theory this idea
that the universe in the deep dark past
13.7 billion years ago was smaller than
an atom
how do we come to this view that the
universe we now occupy
the universe of stupendous complexity
around us and stupendous size and 13.7
billion years in age
how did we come to that what are the
crucial pieces of evidence
well it's just light just different
kinds of photons being interpreted among
the first
bits of evidence really aside from the
dark night sky but let's not worry about
that were hubble's explanations
of spectra
breaking up the light from distant
galaxies and that distant light when
broken up into its spectra showed
spectral lines so we're looking at
spectral lines on photographic plates
and those spectral lines red-shifted
just a little and that evidence
explained by a big bang event the
creation of the entire universe
that is the explanation of those
red-shifted galaxies and this is why
popper is saying
we're going well beyond the evidence we
are transcending the limits of our
imagination and of ordinary language
going from spectral lines to the
creation of the entire universe that's
pretty stupendous stuff what was darwin
doing looking at tortoises and
finches and what was his explanation
about those
locally interesting things that all of
life on the planet
had evolved over hundreds of millions
even billions of years through this
process of
natural selection tiny amounts of
evidence and us going well beyond the
evidence to conjecture
grand explanations about how reality
works
that's science not this process of
prediction now in this section that i've
just read from i do have to say i do
disagree with what poppa says in parts
of this section but this is again inside
baseball it's important for me to
understand that i disagree here but it
doesn't make a substantial difference to
preparing epistemology as a whole there
are often disagreements among papyrians
the great danny frederick was a great
papa scholar and he and i would engage
in debates about
what the purpose of science or knowledge
creation is in general danny's
perspective was that it wasn't
that we were after truth we were not
actually looking for the truth as he
would argue
truth cannot be a epistemic aim
now i often took exception to this idea
this way of explaining what we're doing
when we create knowledge danny was a
realist and a popeyrian but i always get
worried when people deny the fact that
we are after truth danny endorsed the
idea that truth existed he just didn't
think that this is what we were trying
to find i guess it depends upon the
person some people might very well be
trying to find the truth or find at
least some truth sometimes or perhaps by
removing falsity or removing
misconception in that way they're
finding truth anyway i do not want to
try and represent danny's position here
you can look up danny frederick and look
up the papers that he wrote but i like
to say that what we're doing is of
course
solving problems and the solution to our
problems our explanations our theories
must contain truth and the reason why it
must contain truth is because an actual
solution to be a solution
is useful
and it's only useful because it is able
to solve the problem which means it's
got something right and right just means
true so there's something true about
that solution if indeed it's a genuine
solution to our problem so
this kind of really splitting hairs
about what the purpose of science is at
that level is it about trying to find
the truth trying to find some truth
trying to solve a problem get something
right create an explanation all of these
are kind of circling the same kind of
idea
but
what we disagree with the
non-popularians about is that
all we're doing in science is trying to
make predictions that's the
instrumentalist claim or that we're
merely telling
stories to each other that are nothing
but
fictional narratives that don't actually
connect with objective reality at all
some people of course deny the existence
of objective reality or deny the
possibility that we can explain
objective reality to some extent to any
extent as realists in the papillion mold
we think that we are actually explaining
aspects of objective reality and we are
getting more or less close to that
objective reality
as time goes on by refining our
explanations by finding perhaps where
they fail in other words where there's a
problem with them or correcting errors
in them and improving them
making progress
sometimes by radically overturning a
particular theory and sometimes by
incrementally changing some aspects of
our understanding of reality so let me
go back to papa for a moment
and to the beginning of this chapter
because i've been speaking a lot about
probability recently
and so perhaps just to satisfy listeners
who have often asked me where do you
disagree with papa well here's a
particular place so i'm going to read
from well it's called section 27 and
just titled corroboration certainty
uncertainty and probability and papa
rights quote i have in the preceding two
chapters explored the logical
ramifications of the problem of
induction
there is another ramification however
which i have not yet touched on because
it is not logically connected to the
problem of induction but it is connected
with it by tires that may prove even
stronger than logic by the inductive
prejudice and by a mistaken solution of
the problem of induction which
unfortunately is still widely accepted
as valid
i am alluding of course to the view that
although induction is unable to
establish an induced hypothesis with
certainty it is able to do the next best
thing it can attribute to the induced
hypothesis some degree of probability
and a probability of one would be
certainty end quote so here popper is
saying that that's wrong that an induced
hypothesis cannot even
establish as true
anything with a degree of probability
which is what many many people tried to
say the solution to induction was
remember this problem of induction was
how can we rely on the theories of
science
if we can't prove them as true we need
some
lesser degree of confidence in them okay
this was the problem of induction how do
our past observations confer some degree
of certainty on
the future reliance on
a particular theory papa keeps going and
he writes quote this view is radically
mistaken yet it can be supported by a
highly persuasive argument this argument
may be presented as follows the whole
problem of induction the argument runs
clearly arises from the fact that
inductive inferences are not valid which
is the same as saying that inductive
conclusions do not follow deductively
from the inductive premises
but there is no need to get alarmed
about this somewhat trite fact
especially as there exists a large and
important class of inferences which the
conclusion does not strictly follow from
the premises in fact every deductive
inference may be modified so as to yield
an inference which is not valid but only
more or less valid or valid to a degree
take the following example here's a
valid deductive argument all men smoke
jack is a man therefore jack smokes here
is an argument that is
valid to a degree
x percent of men spoke
jack is a man therefore jack smokes end
quote now i would just interject here
and say well that's clearly ridiculous
it simply doesn't follow jack is a man
who either smokes or he doesn't and we
won't know until we have an explanation
by means of an observation that jack
actually smokes there is no jack
probably smokes
and popper agrees with this by the way
of course papa goes on to explain
a whole bunch of things about why it is
that some people would endorse that
particular second kind of valid to a
degree argument and after some
exposition on this point he says quote
thus the problem of induction is to be
solved by constructing a generalized
logic
a logic of probability
end quote he's still manning their
argument right and
i would say still people today endorse
this kind of thing he continues quote
for according to this persuasive
argument inductive logic is nothing but
probability logic it is the logic of
uncertain inference of uncertain
knowledge and the probability of some
hypothesis h given some evidence is the
degree to which our certain knowledge of
the evidence
rationally justifies our belief in the
hypothesis
as i have said before
i believe that this argument is
completely mistaken the appeal to
probability does not affect the problem
of induction at all
formally this may be supported by the
remark that every universal hypothesis
goes so far beyond any empirical
evidence that its probability will
always remain zero because the universal
hypothesis makes assertions about an
infinite number of cases
while the number of observed cases can
only be
finite
end quote that's marvelous that's their
papa at his best what we're doing in
science when we come up with theories we
come up with especially in physics but
you know chemistry biology we're coming
up with universal theories theories that
apply to everything at all times at all
places in other words an assertion about
an infinite number of cases but how can
we possibly get to that assertion about
an infinite number of cases if we can
only ever have a finite number of
observed cases well that's because we
begin with the theory we don't begin
with the finite number of observed cases
it's cart before the horse kind of stuff
this is the great mistake that popper
was addressing and solving
everyone else was saying well look you
begin with the observations even today
you begin with the observations this is
the whole point of science you go out
into the world and you observe stuff
and from those observations you then
derive your knowledge no
that's all ass around that's all can't
before the horse put the horse before
the cart and the horse is the theory you
come up with the theory first you
explain what's going on you conjecture
you use your imagination your creativity
that's what you are you're a human being
that's what you're supposed to be doing
in the world it doesn't just mean in
science everywhere now
having come up with a solution then you
rely upon that solution and you keep on
using that solution until one day you
come across a problem which usually
means you encounter one of your finite
observations one of your finite
observations that disagrees with your
prevailing view your existing theory
what you have thought so far for so long
and that contradicts what you've thought
all this time and so then you're going
to have to adapt on the run you're going
to have to create come up with a new
solution and in science you're coming up
with this explanation that explains
everything you've seen so far it's not
being derived from what you've seen it
explains what you've seen
and then
reaches out from what you have seen and
where you are sitting at your desk or in
your laboratory to everywhere else
in the universe
to things you will never observe but it
will apply to them in the same way that
let's assume the old wives tale the
urban legend the myth that you know
newton saw the apple fall from the tree
let's say he did do that very
questionable but let's say he did
this is one of the observations it's not
like he took that observation and from
that observation of the apple falling
derived his universal theory of gravity
no he came up with the universal theory
of gravity which explained the motion of
planets across the sky and apples
falling and tides going in and out and
it reached out from where he was in
england
across the earth
throughout the solar system to the other
side of the galaxy and the universe that
same law applied
to fruits falling from trees on the
surface of planets around stars he would
never observe and perhaps no one ever
will this is the thing about science
this is what science does it begins
there with the theory and then moving
through life with your theory you
encounter a problem and that problem is
often not always but often an
observation of some kind especially when
it comes to science it's an observation
of some kind that disagrees with your
theory for reasons you don't know maybe
you've just made
a mistake in your observation you think
you've made an observation but in fact
you haven't it's something's gone wrong
it's an optical illusion who knows what
your instrument wasn't working but
whatever the case you've got a problem
that you've got to solve and sometimes
that might be very well the beginning of
a whole new grand theory of science okay
so that's everything that papa got right
now here is where
i
emphasize things a little differently to
papa and i'd love to be able to speak to
him about what he had in mind i wish
there were examples here but
let me pick it up where he writes quote
let us turn to that idea which i believe
is defensible it is the idea that
hypotheses may be distinguished
according to the results of their tests
the idea that some hypotheses are well
tested by experience and others are not
so well tested that there are further
hypotheses which so far have not been
tested at all and hypotheses which have
not stood up to tests and which
therefore may be regarded as falsified
if we look upon a number of hypotheses
from this point of view there can be no
objection to grading them according to
the degree to which they have passed
their tests
exactly as we make grade students who
have undergone a number of tests some of
them are easy some of them difficult the
wish to grade hypotheses according to
the tests passed by them is legitimate i
do not know of any serious objection for
reasons to be discussed in the next
section i propose to call the grade of a
hypothesis or the degree to which it has
stood up to tests its degree of
corroboration
rather than its probability end quote
okay we can't speak to him now what a
shame but i just would love to know what
he had in mind where are these
situations where we've got this
great spectrum of hypotheses that we
need to rank order that we need to treat
like students that we're grading where
we say here's hypothesis one and it has
a certain amount of corroboration here's
hypothesis two that's got slightly more
corroboration and here's hypothesis
three that's got yet more corroboration
this doesn't happen
this doesn't happen on papa's own
account this doesn't happen what happens
is if you have that situation ever arise
and as i keep on saying please write in
email me tweet me whatever
a situation where you really do have
these
actual
different
viable
good explanations of the same phenomena
and you can't distinguish between them
and so you need corroboration what
really happens is as we say and as david
deutsche pointed out on more than one
occasion including most importantly in
his paper on the logic of experimental
tests what you do is you come up with a
crucial test an experiment which will
rule out
all of the different alternatives
usually only one if you're lucky all of
the different alternatives
leaving only one standing the one that
can explain the results of the
experiment
so why papa wants this degree of
corroboration i don't know
in what specific situation now
throughout this chapter we don't
actually
get an example which is a problem like
he's right to say that that if you do
have competing hypotheses there's no
point in talking about the probability
of one over the other he's got that
right but degree of corroboration and
exactly how would we measure this degree
of corroboration i don't know the best
he can do
uh in fact in this section he says quote
i shall later give a definition of
degree of corroboration one that permits
us to compare rival theories such as
newtons and einsteins i doubt whether a
numerical evaluation of this degree will
ever be of practical significance end
quote
quite right quite right and if there is
no such
way of providing a numerical evaluation
of this degree what point is it what
point is there in postulating this his
own example my trope example that i like
to use following him of course is newton
versus einstein now there to be generous
to him
i think that maybe
what he might be saying one way of
reading him is just to say that this
degree of corroboration is just
perfectly synonymous with refuted or not
refuted or not so either newton's theory
is refuted or it's not refuted now if it
is refuted then you can say well
einstein's theory is corroborated by the
evidence i would just prefer to say
explains the evidence
it explains the evidence it explains the
evidence better than any rival
in fact there are no rivals there are no
longer any rivals how can you say there
are no rivals because we did an
experiment and the only rival that
existed up until that point was newton's
theory of gravity but it couldn't
explain the results of this particular
experiment call it eddington's
experiment but any number of things
these days
it newton's theory can't explain this
stuff so what can einstein's theory is
it well corroborated doesn't matter
doesn't matter whatever this word
corroborated means it doesn't matter the
degree of corroboration you can say it
explains absolutely everything that has
been asked of it well maybe not it can't
quite explain what dark matter is it
can't explain what dark energy is okay
fine but nor can anything else for the
stuff that is explicable by general
relativity by einstein's theory nothing
else can do that job nothing else
explains precisely
why mercury follows the orbit that it
does around the sun only one theory does
that but is that theory well
corroborated that doesn't matter
it doesn't matter on the one hand you
can say yeah every single time you
observe mercury that's another
corroboration of einstein's theory of
general relativity but again degree of
corroboration
if tomorrow someone comes up with an
explanation for gravity that not only
does absolutely everything that
einstein's general theory of relativity
does
not only is able to accomplish
absolutely everything that the existing
theory of gravity does but also goes a
bit further
it is able to solve the problem of what
dark matter is then we'll be in a
situation where we have a theory of
gravity that is
superior
to einstein's stereo of gravity because
it can do everything einstein's theory
of gravity can do
and it can explain
dark matter and in all likelihood the
history of science suggests that when
you have a good explanation it reaches
into areas by postulating the existence
of entities hit the two you never even
imagined so in the case of general
relativity it reaches into areas where
it postulates things like black holes
and big bangs and the curvature of
space-time and gravitational lensing and
various things that weren't even thought
of prior to general relativity and so
whatever the successor is to
general relativity we should expect the
same kind of thing now i just want to
pick up in this section that i'm reading
from a few other gems here that really
they stand the test of time they're just
written so well because poppa at times
because papa wrote a vast amount and as
i keep on emphasizing he was writing for
his contemporaries but if you can get
through some of the jargon at times
the gems in here are absolutely
brilliant and well let me just pick up
one quote every observation and
to an even higher degree every
observation statement
is itself already an interpretation in
the light of our theories yet even
though this fact is most important it
raises a minor issue compared with what
i wish to criticize here a general
attitude a general philosophy of science
a philosophy which makes its main
problem that of explaining whence
science derives its certainty its
rational reliability its validity or its
authority
for i hold that science has no certainty
no rational reliability
no validity no authority the best we can
say about it is that although it
consists of our own guesses of our own
conjectures we are doing our very best
to test them that is to say to criticize
them and to refute them but the
inductivist philosophy not only
attributes authority to science it also
perhaps quite unwittingly attributes to
science a cautious and indeed timid
approach which is entirely foreign to
our real procedure end quote and that of
course is the quote i began this episode
with but isn't it brilliant that papa
there still
is a revolutionary of a kind when it
comes to epistemology because so many
people simply don't understand that and
yet reject him out of hand and yet here
he is
getting straight to the point
about the purpose of science and what
we're up to what we're doing when it
comes to science and even more broadly
than science
testing our own guesses and our
conjectures trying to criticize and
refute them but instead so many people
are fixated on this idea of the
authority of something or other the
authority of science and papa rejected
that you rejected authority everywhere
politics as moral authorities political
authorities scientific authorities okay
just a little more here before we i know
this is going to be an extremely long
episode but just a little more here
about corroboration
section 28 papa goes on to say in the
foregoing section i introduced the term
degree of corroboration to characterize
the degree to which a hypothesis has
stood up to tests
in the present section i intend to
discuss merely a terminological issue
my reasons for proposing to speak of
degree of corroboration rather than of
the probability of a hypothesis in the
light of the tests my main reason is of
course that the latter phrase although
in itself perfectly legitimate is liable
to lead to confusion end quote so where
i disagree is it's not perfectly
legitimate i don't think there is such a
thing as
probability of a hypothesis in the light
of the tests
i just don't think there's any point of
speaking in that way and his attempt to
improve this by saying well i'm not
going to talk about probability i'm
instead going to talk about
corroboration
is a false dichotomy
both of these approaches unusually for
papa can be rejected
because of papa's own best solution
which is what we're doing is ruling out
all the other theories left with only
one that doesn't need so we don't need
to be concerned about corroboration we
just need to be concerned about
whether or not our theory solves our
problem explains our phenomena has no
other rivals that are yet to be ruled
out by experimental tests which in
science they always are at least
eventually papa spends many many pages
criticizing and i think rightly the
whole language of probability to a large
extent and the whole
application of probability to
epistemology he highlights errors and
it's very much worth reading i'm not
going to read through it now as i say
this is already getting very long and
perhaps i'm losing part of my audience
but let me pick it up where papa does
try to introduce an example and so where
he tries to
justify for what of another word his use
of this whole concept of corroboration
or degree of corroboration he goes on to
say quote no rule of content holds for
the first sense of probability which i
call degree of corroboration on the
contrary most physicists will say that
maxwell's theory of light is more
probable in the first sense that is to
say better corroborated or better tested
than fresno's theory of light the reason
is that maxwell's theory has been more
widely and more severely tested even in
fields in which fresno's theory cannot
be tested
at the same time maxwell's theory has a
much greater logical content than
fresnels maxwell's is a wave theory of
light and a theory of electromagnetism
while fresnels is merely a wave theory
of light thus maxwell's theory although
more probable in the sense of being
better corroborated or better tested is
at the same time less probable in the
sense of the second usage of the word
which is also very well established
especially if we are thinking not so
much of the tests successfully passed by
a hypothesis but rather the chances that
an event will occur end quote again i
think this is all
useless i i don't think that we need to
worry about how many you know counting
up how many successfully passed tests
a particular hypothesis
has managed to pass if this was the case
if this was the case then you know my
mystery about why is it on this view of
things being more probable the more
tests they passed why is it that the day
before
the day before newton's theory of
gravity was finally once and for all
refuted by eddington's experiment why
was it that that day apparently its
probability of truth was at its highest
because it was that day that it had
passed the most tests thousands millions
of tests perhaps
every time someone observed anything
that could have been explained by
newton's theory of gravity it was
it was newton's theory of gravity had
passed all of these tests and not passed
some but apparently einstein's theory
which was brand new had not passed as
many tests it hadn't it simply hadn't
not many people had applied it to a two
certain problems certainly albert
einstein had and maybe a few other
physicists who understood the theory at
the time in 1919
but really it hadn't been used to solve
problems so it wasn't passing tests but
that's irrelevant it doesn't matter how
many tests it's passed it can be the
best explanation it can be closer to
true closer to describing reality than
any other alternative including newtons
which have passed more tests this whole
idea of corroboration introduces a
problem which doesn't need to be solved
the problem would be well newton's
theory has been
very heavily corroborated by all of
these tests that went before but
einstein's theory had not yet been
corroborated they cared about
corroboration it's about
refutation and explanation and when we
have two competing explanations we seek
a method of refutation of trying to rule
it out that's exactly what happens now
let me go towards the end of this
particular section and and finally um
tie up loose ends about this and why
again i would love to be able to speak
to popper about this because popper
almost admits
he almost admits in his very chapter
that he's making a mistake
i'll just read he says quote and this is
coming from
page number 228 of realism in the aim of
science he writes quote there is
unfortunately the danger of another
terminological confusion until recently
in fact until the logic of scientific
discovery was in galley proof i did not
use the term degree of corroboration but
in its place the term
degree of confirmation
and i made use of this term for
precisely the same reason because of the
need to avoid the term
probability
therefore i must now make clear why i
have decided to change my terminology
after using it in at least half a dozen
publications end quote okay i'm not
going to go on with his explanation here
about why he's chosen to
change tac to using degree of
corroboration he's saying right there
that he wants to avoid the term
probability he understands that his own
epistemology
entails that you can't say things like
this hypothesis is probably true and
you're not even aiming for something to
be probably true or certainly true or
anything like that but despite that
because he feels like he needed to have
some replacement for this whole idea of
things being more probable a particular
theory being more probable but he knows
that that's a mistake he knows that
that's wrong he knows that he's not
trying to in our project rather in
science and anywhere else is not to try
and find the most probable theory that's
not what we're trying to do
but he thinks he needs a replacement for
that so at first in the logic of
scientific discovery at first his best
guess was to say well
rather than talk about how well how
probable a particular theory is he's
going to talk about
the degree of confirmation
how well confirmed a theory is
and now decades later in writing this
book on on reflection he's realized whoa
i shouldn't have been talking about
degree of confirmation we can't confirm
our theories or partly confirm our
theories or anything like that he
realizes that's wrong but he still wants
something else he wants corroboration
now to fill the void but the fact is
there is no void his own philosophy does
away with that whole thing that whole
way of speaking and thinking this whole
idea of this particular theory is more
probable this particular theory is more
confirmed or best confirmed or this
theory even has a higher degree of
corroboration i think all of that
is not a part of papyrian epistemology
papyrian epistemology is about
trying to create good explanations and
if you're lucky as i've said for about
the tenth time in this episode alone
if you're lucky you might have competing
explanations that's extremely rare but
if you do then you do what papa has
explained you come up with the
experimental test that rules out all but
one
never mind how probable that theory is
never mind if it's certain or has some
degree of certainty and never mind if
it's been corroborated by repeated
observations that's not important what's
important is whether or not your theory
your explanation actually does the job
of accounting for those observations
that finite set of observations and then
allows you to infer what is true about
the rest of physical reality
because you're explaining the rest of
physical reality so your predictions
about the rest of physical reality are
derived from that explanation but it's
not the other way around you're not
deriving the explanation from the finite
set of observations and then predicting
that therefore that finite set of
observations in some way inductively
infers or entails that a particular set
of observations will continue in fact it
might say quite the opposite that the
explanation of this particular finite
set of observations says that tomorrow
they're not going to continue for
whatever reason okay i did say i was
going to finish there but i can't there
is a little bit right at the end here of
this section on corroboration that well
i have to give karl popper the final
word almost the final word
[Laughter]
let's read his conclusion here and he
writes quote i conclude this section by
giving a summary of my views concerning
corroboration in the form of seven
points the first of which contains the
fundamental idea number one
the degree of corroboration of a theory
is an evaluation of the results of the
empirical tests it has undergone end
quote okay so that point number one
there i've got no problem with i mean he
could talk about the degree of
corroboration as an evaluation the
results of empirical tests in other
words it would be a synonym for
which theory survives the process of
experimental refutation and if you want
to call that degree of corroboration
fine i think it might be a little bit
misleading because we've got this
concept of degree
this one has
more survive than the other but it's a
black and white thing isn't it i mean if
you want to say that
on and off is a degree or true and false
is a degree of truth or falsity fine but
most people what they mean by degree is
a gray scale whereas i would say it's
black and white and i think that popper
thinks it's black and white as well
but he's speaking in the language of his
opponents
let's continue quote number two
there are two attitudes two ways of
looking at the relations between are
theory and experience
one may look for confirmation or for
refutation these two attitudes are
obviously variants of the apologetic or
dogmatic and of the critical attitude
scientific tests are always attempted
refutations
number three the difference between
attempted confirmations and attempted
refutations or tests
is largely though not completely
amenable to logical analysis four a
theory will be said to be the better
corroborated the more severe the tests
it has passed and the better it has
passed them end quote again as you
probably guess what i'm going to say is
that's kind of pointless when you've got
an explanation either it passes the test
or it doesn't
it's very rare to worry about which one
is passing more severe tests
you might very well say okay we're
comparing newton and einstein and
eddington's experiment is a severe test
and in passing that severe test that is
the reason why we endorse that theory
and not newton's theory but i think it's
just the wrong way around the phrasing
things rather than talk about which one
is passing tests
just talk about which one failed the
tests and which one failed the test
never mind severity which one failed it
was newton's theory
so
for all practical purposes discard that
theory
when you when it comes to explaining
things like the results of eddington's
experiment you might not discard the
theory for a whole bunch of other things
like predicting the tides or how fast
apples are falling from trees it could
be very useful for that kind of thing
but papa goes on to say 0.5 quote a test
will be said to be the more severe the
greater the probability of failing it
the absolute or prior probability as
well as the probability in light of what
i call our background knowledge that is
to say knowledge which by common
agreement is not questioned while
testing the theory under investigation
end quote
well there we have a whole lot of stuff
about probability
the very thing that popper has said
you know um it is not of much use when
it comes to epistemology but i think he
still of course thinks well probability
is this real thing
unlike with david deutch who basically
has concluded it's all a scam i mean
real life as i've explained in other
podcasts doesn't obey the probability
calculus even gaming machines and
roulette wheels and so on and so forth
strictly strictly do not obey the
probability calculus only approximately
so but approximately so isn't reality
and isn't our best explanation our best
explanation is quantum theory which says
what actually happens anyway let's just
continue point six popper says quote
thus every genuine test may be described
intuitively as an attempt to catch the
theory
it is not only a severe examination but
as an examination it is an unfair one it
is undertaken with the aim of failing
the examinee rather than the aim of
giving him a chance to show what he
knows
the latter attitude would be that of the
man who wants to confirm or to verify
his theory and seven
assuming always that we are guided in
our tests by a genuinely critical
attitude and that we exert ourselves in
testing the theory an assumption which
cannot be formalized we can say that the
degree of corroboration of a theory will
increase
with the in probability in the light of
background knowledge of the predicted
test statements provided the predictions
derived with the help of the theory are
successful end quote yes so again
so much here is as i say
couched in terms of the language
dominant at the time among
the people he was trying to explain his
philosophy to and he was having a uphill
battle in trying to get these ideas
across this book written decades after
the logic of scientific discovery and
he's still although in objective terms
won the debate he wasn't winning the
debate in academia the academics
didn't accept what he was saying to a
large extent all we need is
to my mind
point two that he said there you've got
two attitudes
two ways of looking at the relationship
between a theory and experience either
you can look for confirmation or you can
look for refutation and these things are
not symmetrical the truth is scientific
tests and indeed all of our critical
apparatus are attempted refutations
and if they fail that means you just
have to rely upon your existing theory
your existing theory is the best thing
you've got in order to try and
solve your problem situation and if it
can't solve your problem situation
you've still got a problem situation so
therefore you better get about creating
a new theory but this whole scheme of
things being probably true
things being more or less certain things
being corroborated or not
is irrelevant and popper doesn't need it
and popularity epistemology doesn't need
it and as i say in the next episode okay
this is sort of an episode in two parts
i suppose
we will see what david deutsch has to
say about this idea
that
we can understand
papa's epistemology better than popular
in the same way
as david will explain people today can
understand einstein's theories better
than einstein or darwin's theory of
natural selection better than darwin
just because these people begin by
explaining to us for the first time the
theory we shouldn't expect that they
best explain the theory
the theory
rightly deserves to be named after them
but that does not mean they have some
sort of ownership of it and in fact
poppa was one of the first to actually
say that
once the theory has been explained
it ceases to be that person's theory
they don't have that they cannot claim
any special insight into the theory
other people can be more insightful
about that theory i'm certainly not
claiming that what i am claiming is that
poppa's own explanation of his own
theory means that sometimes some of what
he said about that theory is kind of
redundant i think we need it
but until next time which should be very
soon i'll release the next one very soon
bye
[Music]
oh
uh
[Music]